Effect of dietary polyphenol-rich grape seed on growth performance, antioxidant capacity and ileal microflora in broiler chicks.

In this study, we examined the effect of dietary supplementation with grape seed (GS) on the performance, carcass traits, plasma biochemistry, antioxidant status and ileal microflora in broilers. Experiment diets included a control diet (without additive) and three levels of GS powder (10, 20 and 40 g/kg of diet). Each diet was fed to a total of 300 one-day-old Cobb-500 chicks for 42 days. The addition of 20 g/kg of GS to the basal diet increased final body weight and body weight gain, improved the feed conversion ratio and did not affect feed intake. Dietary 20 g GS significantly increased (p < .05) the percentage of carcass yield %, dressing % and gizzard. However, the addition of 40 g/kg of GS significantly reduced the percentage of abdominal fat in the birds. Diets supplemented with GS showed the lowest content of ether extract compared with the control group (p < .05). The physical characteristics of meat and the chemical composition of DM, CP and ash were not significantly influenced by treatments. In the GS groups, plasma protein, albumin, globulin, aspartate aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase concentrations showed no significant change compared with the control group. Broilers fed a diet supplemented with GS had lower levels of plasma glucose, total lipids, triglycerides and cholesterol compared with the control birds (p < .05). The addition of 40 g of GS significantly (p < .05) enhanced the activity of reduced glutathione, catalase, superoxide dismutase, glutathione peroxidase and GST, and correlated with significantly decreased thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances levels compared with the control group. The value of ileal pH was not significantly affected by the GS levels. Broilers fed diets supplemented with GS had lower ileal Streptococcus spp. and Escherichia coli populations but higher Lactobacillus spp. populations (p < .05). No adverse effects on birds' health were detected due to the use of GS. Thus, GS could be recommended as an herbal supplement in the diet of broiler chickens to improve performance, reduce blood lipids, enhance antioxidant capacity and decrease detrimental bacteria in the ileum.