Diet Quality and the Gut Microbiota in Women Living in Alabama.

INTRODUCTION: The gut microbiota is associated with obesity and modulated by individual dietary components. However, the relationships between diet quality and the gut microbiota and their potential interactions with weight status in diverse populations are not well understood. This study examined the associations between overall diet quality, weight status, and the gut microbiota in a racially balanced sample of adult females. METHODS: Female participants (N=71) residing in Birmingham, Alabama provided demographics, anthropometrics, biospecimens, and dietary data in this observational study from March 2014 to August 2014, and data analysis was conducted from August 2017 to March 2019. Weight status was defined as a BMI (weight [kg]/height [m2]) <30 kg/m2 for non-obese participants and ≥30 kg/m2 for participants who were obese. Dietary data collected included an Automated Self-Administered 24-Hour recall and Healthy Eating Index-2010 (HEI-2010) score. Diet quality was defined as having a high HEI score (≥median) or a low HEI score (<median). The fecal microbiota was collected, and the 16S ribosomal RNA gene was amplified to profile the microbiota composition. Differences in diet quality based on weight status were assessed using 2-sample t-tests. The associations between diet quality, gut microbiota, and weight status were analyzed using negative binomial models. RESULTS: Participants (43 Black, 28 White) aged 40.39±13.86 years who were non-obese (56%) and obese (44%) were studied. Greater alpha diversity was observed among those with higher Healthy Eating Index scores (p=0.037) but did not differ by weight status. Higher abundances of Bacteroidetes (p=0.006) and Firmicutes (p=0.042) were associated with a higher HEI score. Higher Bacteriodetes levels were observed among non-obese (p=0.006). CONCLUSIONS: Diet quality measured by the HEI was associated with alpha diversity of the gut microbiota among adult females. Abundances of phyla that have been linked with weight status (Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes) were positively associated with diet quality.