Gut microbiota signatures of long-term and short-term plant-based dietary pattern and cardiometabolic health: a prospective cohort study

Background
The interplay among the plant-based dietary pattern, gut microbiota, and cardiometabolic health is still unclear, and evidence from large prospective cohorts is rare. We aimed to examine the association of long-term and short-term plant-based dietary patterns with gut microbiota and to assess the prospective association of the identified microbial features with cardiometabolic biomarkers.
Methods
Using a population-based prospective cohort study: the China Health and Nutrition Survey, we included 3096 participants from 15 provinces/megacities across China. We created an overall plant-based diet index (PDI), a healthful plant-based diet index (hPDI), and an unhealthful plant-based diet index (uPDI). The average PDIs were calculated using repeat food frequency questionnaires collected in 2011 and 2015 to represent a long-term dietary pattern. Short-term dietary pattern was estimated using 3-day 24-h dietary recalls collected in 2015. Fecal samples were collected in 2015 and measured using 16S rRNA sequencing. We investigated the association of long-term and short-term plant-based dietary patterns with gut microbial diversity, taxonomies, and functional pathways using linear mixed models. Furthermore, we assessed the prospective associations between the identified gut microbiome signatures and cardiometabolic biomarkers (measured in 2018) using linear regression.
Results
We found a significant association of short-term hPDI with microbial alpha-diversity. Both long-term and short-term plant-based diet indices were correlated with microbial overall structure, whereas long-term estimates explained more variance. Long-term and short-term PDIs were differently associated with microbial taxonomic composition, yet only microbes related to long-term estimates showed association with future cardiometabolic biomarkers. Higher long-term PDI was associated with the lower relative abundance of Peptostreptococcus, while this microbe was positively correlated with the high-sensitivity C-reactive protein and inversely associated with high-density lipoprotein cholesterol.
Conclusions
We found shared and distinct gut microbial signatures of long-term and short-term plant-based dietary patterns. The identified microbial genera may provide insights into the protective role of long-term plant-based dietary pattern for cardiometabolic health, and replication in large independent cohorts is needed.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12916-022-02402-4.