Nutrition-wide association study of microbiome diversity and composition in colorectal cancer patients

Background
The effects of diet on the interaction between microbes and host health have been widely studied. However, its effects on the gut microbiota of patients with colorectal cancer (CRC) have not been elucidated. This study aimed to investigate the association between diet and the overall diversity and different taxa levels of the gut microbiota in CRC patients via the nutrition-wide association approach.
Methods
This hospital-based study utilized data of 115 CRC patients who underwent CRC surgery in Department of Surgery, Seoul National University Hospital. Spearman correlation analyses were conducted for 216 dietary features and three alpha-diversity indices, Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio, and relative abundance of 439 gut microbial taxonomy. To identify main enterotypes of the gut microbiota, we performed the principal coordinate analysis based on the β-diversity index. Finally, we performed linear regression to examine the association between dietary intake and main microbiome features, and linear discriminant analysis effect size (LEfSe) to identify bacterial taxa phylogenetically enriched in the low and high diet consumption groups.
Results
Several bacteria were enriched in patients with higher consumption of mature pumpkin/pumpkin juice (ρ, 0.31 to 0.41) but lower intake of eggs (ρ, -0.32 to -0.26). We observed negative correlations between Bacteroides fragilis abundance and intake of pork (belly), beef soup with vegetables, animal fat, and fatty acids (ρ, -0.34 to -0.27); an inverse correlation was also observed between Clostridium symbiosum abundance and intake of some fatty acids, amines, and amino acids (ρ, -0.30 to -0.24). Furthermore, high intake of seaweed was associated with a 6% (95% CI, 2% to 11%) and 7% (95% CI, 2% to 11%) lower abundance of Rikenellaceae and Alistipes, respectively, whereas overall beverage consumption was associated with an 10% (95% CI, 2% to 18%) higher abundance of Bacteroidetes, Bacteroidia, and Bacteroidales, compared to that in the low intake group. LEfSe analysis identified phylogenetically enriched taxa associated with the intake of sugars and sweets, legumes, mushrooms, eggs, oils and fats, plant fat, carbohydrates, and monounsaturated fatty acids.
Conclusions
Our data elucidates the diet-microbe interactions in CRC patients. Additional research is needed to understand the significance of these results in CRC prognosis.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12885-022-09735-6.